we start developing like a false front
oh here I'm going to show you all the
parts that are socially acceptable what
was allowed to be seen what was socially
acceptable or culturally acceptable or
acceptable in our families so then if
we're truly seen it risks being seen
beyond the false front and I think
that's what is
terrifying I'm I'm Brett kler and I'm
here today with Tara Howley terara is a
coach and master facilitator and a
founder of the art of accomplishment
coures and practices hi Brett and this
is the art of accomplishment podcast
where we explore living the life you
want with enjoyment and
ease made it yeah and today we're going
to talk about the desire to be seen just
something that all of us have from
childhood through adulthood and it's
it's something that drives a lot of
behavior in society both the desire to
be seen and also sometimes the fear of
being seen yes people want to be seen it
is a I would almost say a biological
imperative where the first thing as
babies their vision is the length of a
mama's face so they can see to Mama it
is the very first thing that one of the
very early things that kick in is being
able to see those close to us and to be
seen and to track safety through seeing
and being seen it's how we know we're
safe in our community um at all stages
of life if we're seen and a wildfire
comes we know that the community will
grab us and take us I think this is as
old as as
humanity and we villainize it for a
number of
reasons so this Basic Instinct wanting
to be seen it usually we start telling
children very young like oh that's bad
you know tone it down don't brag don't
get excited don't ask for my attention
and we kind of clamp it down and then
villainize it in ourselves and others
over and over and over again throughout
the rest of our lives so what what makes
this something important to explore in
our own self-development and self-
exploration that's a great question I
think that when we can truly see
ourselves and truly allow ourselves to
be seen and see others is one of the
basic ways we grow and
flourish if we are holding up a false
identity and can't see all of our
goodness and all of our
imperfection then we're growing from
that false Identity or we're growing
from lack whereas if we can really see
ourselves our wholeness our Perfection
our goodness our imperfection then
that's a natural instigator of growth
and without that we're we're trying to
fix ourselves we're not just inherently
growing and we're also not truly
seeing people around us so we're not
really seeing their goodness we're not
seeing the goodness all around us and
the imperfection all around us us yeah
so what I'm hearing there is that
there's this deep freedom and connection
that's available when we are seeing and
what we just opened up the topic with is
the desire to be seen and so I'm curious
how does our desire to be seen relate to
our capacity to see I see it as
bidirectional that we um often when we
cannot see ourselves we will over index
on wanting to be seen on longing to be
seen because that that biological need
is there so we're over indexing trying
to get it from out there as opposed to
um being with it and wanting it but not
from longing well not from lack ah
there's a way when we're acting from
lack it's the golden algorithm when
we're acting from lack all we see is not
enoughness so if that basic need to be
seen wasn't met when we were little
wasn't met when we are teenagers wasn't
met in our young adulthood isn't met in
our adulthood then there's this Hungry
Ghost always trying to be
seen and in doing so it actually tends
to annoy people make sure that we're not
seen make sure that we don't see the
ways we are being
seen um obfuscate who we truly are so we
even can't be seen you said like make
sure we're not seen as though that's a
strategy and um I'm curious when to look
at the other side of the equation that
we were just talking about how we want
to be seen but also sometimes we push
away the being seen and it sounds like
you were alluding to that right there
and that the the way that we come to it
from lack can create an environment
where we're actually pushing it away can
you speak a little bit more about that
yes I I think most of us it's a push
pull right see me see me oh my gosh
don't see me and I think underneath it
often is a lot of Shame see me see me
but wait don't see me CU if you see me
you're going to see my Badness or my
wrongness or all the ways I'm [__] up
so that shame we were when we said see
me see me see me as kids we were often
shamed to stifle that emotion like oh
come on don't don't ask for so much Tamp
it down don't brag it was pushed down so
there's a shame reaction so we have that
shame inherent shame and then see me see
me that need is still there but don't
see me don't see me because we have the
shame and we think that we are shameful
and if people actually see us they're
not going to like what they see
or will further shame us I think shame
plays a large role there for many of us
yeah it's interesting sort of the
atmology of the word shame is kind of
hide there's some there's something
about like this isn't to be seen in it
so what I'm hearing there is that the
shame impacts the way that we see
ourselves what we're allowed to see
we're we're taught through whatever
external reactions to being seen as kids
that certain parts of us are like bad or
wrong or otherwise need to be hidden in
shame and how does that impact our
capacity to really see ourselves clearly
and really see see the motivations
behind the desire to be seen or the mo
motivations behind any any part of
ourselves that others might see yeah I I
think after we've gotten shamed we start
developing in like a false front like oh
here I'm going to show you all the parts
that are socially acceptable and we
create this false front like I'm happy
I'm always happy right you see the kids
who are just always allowed only to be
happy like I'm happy like
Frozen um or I'm smart and pensive and
so we develop this false front based on
what was allowed what was allowed to be
seen what was socially acceptable or
culturally acceptable or acceptable in
our families that false front is what we
present so then if we're truly seen
people are going to see beond it risks
being seen beyond the false front and I
think that's what is terrifying yeah so
when you've built up a life where you're
seen for a false front you experience
not really being seen but also then
there's something very risky about
actually the who you what you are behind
that false front being seen so then
you're in a bit of a double bind sounds
like that's exactly right and it's an
external double bind and an internal
double bind right we often don't even
allow ourselves to see those parts so
they're like pushed into our shadow all
of our parts that are so-called selfish
or needy or um needing attention right
all of that gets pushed back there and
and we don't even see it yeah I would
love to even kind of drill down on a
little bit closer on our definition of
like what is it what is it to be seen
what does that mean what does that do
for us it's a great question why is that
such a primal human need I I always go
back to how we developed as humans and
we developed in groups uh Hunter gathers
in the early days and so I think we had
to be seen by the that group that tribe
if you will that Community um to stay
safe so actually had to be seen to stay
safe so there's safety right if a
wildfire comes through if we were seen
we were grabbed and we were taken we
moved with the group wherever they moved
next next also if we were seen we were
developed it is through really being
seen that we grow when Elders teachers
really see us they are um supporting our
development and our skills through sight
through being seen so I think it is a
basic need for safety for survival
but also to develop our skill set and to
develop into whole people and so how
does that need develop or change over
the course of Life imagine a small child
absolutely needs couldn't survive
without the support and mentorship and
you know teachings of the of the tribe
of the family and then how does that how
does that develop over the course of a
life I can guess that it doesn't become
as much survival the survival Instinct
isn't based on it as much as we get
older but I do think that the Thrive
Instinct isn't the I don't know if
Thrive instinct is the right word what
would be the that
um living isn't based on it but thriving
is based on
it that when we're really
seen we can
flourish as we get older and I think
this applies to I see it in companies
often the CEO is very independent and um
used to being self uh you know takes
care of everything on their own doesn't
need anybody else so they don't know how
to truly see aren't used to being seen
themselves and then as a result aren't
great at acknowledging others so they
have a bunch of direct reports who are a
little hungry for acknowledgement and
never getting totally acknowledged
whereas acknowledgement
drives um performance for most people so
if you're getting acknowledged at work
if your CEO can acknowledge you then you
most people tend to thrive it also is um
it's a way to put up the guard rails
through acknowledgement and seeing like
hey well done creates connection and um
increases performance so I think it is
needed throughout all of life not in the
same survival but in a in a th thrival
wayal right that we thrive on being seen
we thrive on nection yeah and what you
were just describing there with the you
know the CEO and the company it sounds
like the acknowledgement and the seeing
and being seen is a lot of the kind of
social Fabric in an organization or in a
in a community that supports the
thriving and what you were just saying
with a CEO if they're not if they're not
acknowledging if they're not able to to
see the way that they're supported in
their team then it probably leads to
that team
trying to seek their acknowledgement
more in ways that end up making the CEO
feel more alone and unseen themselves
then you end up in this it seems like a
really common dynamic in any conflict is
two people want to be seen by the
other and then react in ways that cause
the other to feel less seen and and so
on absolutely I would say under most
fights most boardroom fights most
couples fights is this I just want to be
seen and heard yeah and you're not
seeing me you're not hearing me on both
sides it takes two sides right and that
but that basic need is there and is
creating the
conflict yeah yeah so so what would you
what would you say to somebody who's in
such a conflict and they're desperately
wanting to be seen they feel very unseen
and the more they've wanted to get seen
the harder it's been and the worse the
conflict has become like what's the
what's the way out of that Chinese
finger trap it's um counterintuitive but
it is to see and to hear
this is where view comes in really handy
asking questions getting curious about
the other person actually truly seeing
look seeking to see and understand is
the the hack how does you seeing someone
else affect your feeling or sense of
being seen what's the interaction there
there's a couple of things that happen
one to really see someone else it
requires coming and settling into the
senses and when you the senses you know
that vision and sound so you're settling
into your own body and in settling into
your own body your nervous system starts
settling so that um fight tendon that
that fight urge calms the parts of the
brain that want to fight calm down parts
of the brain that can see and think
clearly come back online so you can
actually in using the senses you can
actually come back into your body and
into relation with yourself and then
with someone else so that would be one
way that it really helps the other way
is that when you start asking your
partner or direct report or someone else
questions then it takes them out of the
fight flight survival Instinct and
brings them down into
their system to answer a question from
view ideally from view not questions
like why are you being such an [__]
that usually doesn't help but like oh
what makes it happen that we're fighting
like this what's going
on like what's this what's this like for
you sucks what's it like for you yeah
and what does if you you know when you
so I heard you just describe it gets you
into your
senses you're you're in view now it also
has you relate to the other person with
more curiosity so they're more they're
feeling more open so then you're
collecting more data what does that
additional data when you when you see
them more deeply what does that tend to
do to your own story or to your own to
your own insecurity or fears I would say
two things one is it pulls you out of a
corner right anytime we're fighting
we're in a corner there's a little bit
of a trapped sense so that when we start
asking questions and hearing information
we're actually stepping out of the
corner we're stepping out of the Trap
and the mental trap of this is what's
happening when we hear someone else's
story and we listen we don't even have
to believe it we don't have to buy into
it but when we just hear it and honor it
as their perspective then it
starts opening the trap in our mind too
right so our own identity when when
we're really seeing someone else I do
believe parts of our own identity drop
away part of parts of that rified
identity drop away yeah so now I'm I'm
curious what makes that not the natural
proc I mean it might be a natural
process but it's also something that's
not happening all the time you know what
what would prevent somebody from
dropping in and feeling their Sensations
and being like dropping into their body
into themselves when they're feeling
unseen what what kind of emotions or
avoided experience might be waiting for
them that that blocks that right well I
would say one thing one reason we don't
do it is it wasn't modeled for us very
few of us had a model of when being
unseen to actually get curious and drop
into our senses and like hey what's
going on so we none of us have modeling
most of us don't have modeling for that
I didn't have modeling for that most of
the people I see didn't have modeling
for that so that's one what makes it not
the case that we do that is when we're
emotionally triggered by something and
often it's an old trauma I'm not being
seen right usually it's a very young
part of us that's getting re-trigger
there a baby or a grad schooler a
teenager it's a very young part getting
triggered so there's like a trauma
online and so there's um biologically we
go to the fight flight nervous system
right we're in that F FF you know all
those FS responses and the
counterintuitive thing would be to drop
like it's totally counterintuitive to
drop that and come
into our senses like go yeah it's
interesting so if you're if you find
yourself in a situation if I find myself
in a situation where I feel like I'm
unseen and I'm triggered and it's
difficult for me to go into my body into
my Sensations and just really be with
that and so I'm in the cycling Dynamic
of trying to control my reality and
control someone's perception or their
story then how do I even know that it's
actually them that I want to see me it's
not just an older response like how how
how would somebody explore this to you
what what is it that wants to be seen
and by whom is it expected to be seen by
I I don't think it matters if it's an
old person that you know if it's an old
wound wanting to be seen or the current
the current situation is where there's
the the potential for healing and the
key is the first key is to recognize it
like oh I just want to be seen here and
I love the phrase of course because
there's something in my nervous system
and most people I work with and minute
it's like of course I just want to be
seen here that it just like makes it not
a problem and the and the the fight
stops the internal fight stops and
there's like just this softening
of oh of course I just want to be seen
here and hanging out with that and in
doing so that usually is the beginning
of when you say of course to yourself
you're starting to see yourself right
that's honoring a part of
yourself and so that would be the first
step like oh just acknowledging of
course I want to be seen here yeah
interesting what's that's bringing up
for me now is that in in this process of
wanting to be seen and then checking in
with our with our body with our
Sensations getting into view there's a
way that that is actually a process of
seeing ourselves which I think actually
makes it easier for others to see us
because then we're more introspectively
aware of what we might share about our
experience and we can share from a
deeper place but also we're seeing that
deeper place so we might be seeing
beneath the surface layer insecurity or
fear into the deeper care or the deeper
longing absolutely yeah beautifully said
so how would somebody who's listening to
this podcast and they're like oh this is
this is
interesting uh I'm not sure where in my
life this is
applicable how would somebody look look
through their life and just notice where
like what are some of the signs or
symptoms of a an unowned or unseen
desire to be seen that's kind of in the
background running
things the first thing that comes to
mind is bragging anytime we're like well
did you know that the other day I was
usually under that there's this wanting
to be seen and it so it comes out all
sideways as bragging or perceived as
bragging when what it really is is just
like I want to be seen so I would say oh
for anyone who feels self-conscious
around bragging or sharing stories that
that that right there is information
about something wanting to be seen and
and what is it that wants to be seen is
it creativity
intelligence action
success um so that would be one place
another place is anytime if someone else
is bragging you judge it oh they're just
full of hot air then that's a great
pointer to a part of yourself that's not
allowed to be seen anywhere where you
judge anybody else for um wanting to be
seen or being seen or taking up space or
taking up too much space um is a great
pointer to a part of yourself that's not
allowed to be seen or you're not
allowing yourself to see those be two
things there's yeah Envy is a great
pointer to what we will want allow
ourselves to have or to want I love Envy
Envy rocks right cuz it is it's that
pointer to parts of ourselves we we've
disallowed yep so Envy what would be an
awesome one Daydreams some people can't
do it in their lives but they'll go to
very um Exquisite Daydreams and that can
point to parts of selves that want to be
seen like your strengths and skills and
capacity yeah that's a really good one
that just that just brought up a whole
bunch of like memories of like recurring
Daydreams throughout my life of like
having some big success or like save the
day moment or like hitting the home run
on the baseball field at the right
moment and The Crowd Goes Wild yeah I
love Daydreams for that reason I mean
they really represent parts of ourselves
that um are are begging us to kind of
hug and hold and give a
little seeing to
there was one other one that was
somewhere back here give me one second
um it would be compliments pushed away
ah yeah that's a nice double bind yeah
so anytime someone gives you a
compliment and you um discredit it in
your mind or um guard guard the heart
the chest or clench the gut those are
parts of yourself you're that are
longing to be seen but you're not
allowing yourself to see or see or
allowing anyone else to see yeah I want
to double click on that a little bit on
the the fear the fear of truly being
seen what is typically the fear when
when people fear being seen for what
they are seen for who they are and you
know maybe there's some shame around
around it and shame around what they
think will be seen by others ultimately
what's the fear there what what would
make it that if someone's giving us a
heartfelt compliment that we'd push it
away rather than receive it uh
two things come to mind the first one is
the I'm bad right if we're given
a compliment and they're saying oh this
is awesome but we actually think we're
bad then it's triggering a Badness or if
we're actually being seen there's that
fear of they're going to see that
something about me is flawed so it's
that shame piece that you named but I
also think that there is a empowered
peace that very often we don't allow
ourselves to see or other people to see
right our
our empowerment our wholeness our
goodness we can't see our own goodness
therefore can't let someone else see our
our goodness our power so I think it's
two two sides of the same coin in a way
that they that see I'm bad or that see
I'm good neither acceptable there's
another reason we won't receive a
compliment because uh Pride you know
pride is one of the seven deadly sins
and it's like most of us assume if we
take on the compliment that we will
become arrogant and uh prideful and
narcissistic it'll go to our head so we
can't really let it in
because we can't hold our wholeness
right we can't hold that we're good and
bad we're flawed and perfect we're um
human and everything right we're all of
it and so when we can't hold both
realities and we've been told that pride
is a deadly sin then if we let a
compliment in going to be like oh no
can't be that so it gets pushed out yeah
that's interesting cuz like when when
somebody you know the phrase don't let
it go to your head is seems like
analogous to don't let this go to your
false image of yourself and so it's it's
almost as though like the fear is if I
actually let in this compliment it will
go to my False Image because there's no
way I will actually let myself see it
deeply in myself exactly right and I
think that is the earliest way that
parents stop seeing kids kids come home
and they're like look what I did and
often you'll hear the reaction don't let
it get to your head right which is the
parent not seeing the accomplishment or
the work that it took to do or the joy
and the excitement so right there it's
like nope you're not going to be seen
and don't let it so I think don't let it
get to your head and don't be seen are
like synonymous with each other sadly
yeah as a parent what what what emotion
would be avoided in your case if you
were if you were reacting that way to to
one of your daughters I would say
several different emotions if I'm not
allowed my own excitement and a kid
comes to me say look what I did I'm
going to be like Tamp it down kid right
excitement isn't allowed or Pride right
isn't allowed or Joy isn't allowed or um
a sense of accomplishment like I don't
don't have that sense of accomplishment
cuz you keep got to got to work harder
so any it could be any number of those
things
aren't allowed in my system and probably
be different for each parent I was at a
I'll never forget my kids were at one of
those jumpy houses they were jumping
with friends and other kids and they're
going bonkers and it's totally safe it's
set up and designed by insurance
companies right like nothing really I
mean maybe one in a million times things
can go wrong but it's really
overdesigned for protection and I
remember another father being like don't
get too wild in there it was like right
because his wildness wasn't allowed so
he couldn't allow his kids wildness so
whatever piece different for each of us
joy excitement Pride accomplishment
success yeah that's fascinating I'm now
thinking of this perhaps uh polarity or
dichotomy or dilemma double bind between
being seen as a being seen in a certain
way and allowing our
wildness yes yeah the and the minute we
start needing to be seen in a in a
certain way to be safe in our families
which happens to all of us it is a
tamping down of our wildness and it is a
tamping down of our our musculature and
our authenticity and who we really are
and and our wildness and I do love our
wildness and it's why I love when we do
emotional work because I do believe that
anger work and grief brings us back to
our
wildness brings us back in touch with
that yeah what what does it tend to look
like when you're working with a client
and you know they're working on
something related to being seen maybe
it's one of many things they're working
on at a time but this is something that
starts to move in them and their the
wildness starts being seen and welcomed
and coming through what are some of the
first what does that Journey look like I
would say it's different I never think
one case fits all it usually involves
getting some ground some safety um
feeling their bodies and then um
compassion compassion is a big piece in
it if we can be with our hearts and be
gentle with ourselves then we can
actually start to see our whole selves
we really need to have compassion to see
our our um beyond our false self beyond
that mask we need to have a lot of
compassion so having it often entails a
lot of compassion for self and then
compassion for other right that and that
tends to be biral so the more we can
have compassion for other people's
imperfections and failures then we can
have compassion for our own and then we
can see ourselves more and more and see
them more and more and I I do see
compassion being a huge part of the
journey to seeing ourselves and allowing
ourselves to be seen because the more
compassion we have on board then we're
not afraid of our
shadow and our imperfections our
selfishness and our greed and our um
loneliness and our anger and our rage
we're not afraid of all of those parts
so we can see them and then we can allow
other other people to see them and and
so what's the what is a common emotional
Journey when when someone starts to let
go of or they've they've worked through
or seen behind the desire to be seen in
this like self this false
self-image what are some of the
emotional patterns that they'll start to
bump up against and and learn to welcome
to deepen into that Journey uh the one
of the first things I see people bump
into is having to grieve all that they
ignored all the ideas they had all the
parts of themselves that they had to
kind of stamp down in order to maintain
a false front so there's a a grieving
part and hand in hand with that usually
anger and fear so there's a huge
emotional emotional experience that
happens trying to think of the other
parts of themselves that bump into and
then you start bumping into the
imperfect part the shadow truly right
the um and some places well the parts of
the self that weren't allowed the parts
of the selves that are Petty or not
smart or not compassionate if you always
had to be smart in your family and
that's the the kind of the front you
hold up then you have to bump into the
parts of yourselves that aren't smart or
are slower or not understanding all the
other parts in the shadow or the parts
that are um all the it's the disallowed
Parts really we have to see them to to
see
ourselves to see our um our loneliness
and our grief and our hurt and our rage
and our all those like selfishness all
those parts that were not acceptable if
I look back through
my life instances where somebody really
wanted to be seen or I really wanted to
be seen like all of those are the parts
that really wanted to be seen and it
might have been like oh I want to be
seen for doing the dishes but it's on
some really deep level it's what you
just described that is actually actually
wanting to be seen and a conflict will
just continue you can you can see me for
doing the dishes five or six times and
it won't necessarily change the pattern
unless like the those deeper Things
become unless the wildness yeah is
welcome yeah the wildness I love that
phrasing yeah so for for somebody
listening right now what is something
that they could do today if if they were
to identify somewhere in their life
where in they're in a relationship
they're like oh I'm in this kind of
tension or there's there's a dynamic
where I noticed that I've really been
wanting to be seen what's something that
they could do an experiment they could
run some tool something they could try
that
could change that Dynamic for them mhm
I'd say two offand one is see yourself
right like oh I see how hard I'm working
or I see how much I want it and just
have a little practice of oh these are
all the things I see about me so that
you're practicing that internal gaze of
seeing
self and then the
bidirectional um doing it externally as
well see your partner see your community
share things you're seeing with them see
your direct reports and acknowledge you
see like oh I see how hard you work to
get the dishes done or I see how hard
you're working to get XYZ I see that you
hit all those goals Way Beyond their due
dates that's awesome like really seeing
acknowledging yeah I love how that the
there's a kind of twist on the Gratitude
practice there and this is this is a
kind of gratitude practice that you can
just do yourself internally
and like with else but it doesn't have
to be a partner it can just be something
you do in your life absolutely it does
not require anybody else yeah just you
yeah which is great CU you can do it
anywhere anytime you can go to sleep
like oh I see how hard I work to hit my
XYZ today I see how much time I gave it
to my kids oh I see how much joy I had
with my garden I love how that's like a
flip from the state of Desire like I
know that I want to be seen and
therefore this this tool this experiment
you provided is to actually do the
seeing like be the seeing you want to be
in the world or something like that
there's a reason that phrase is a is so
widely used in such a hit right because
all all of those things if we want more
love in our lives I want more love in my
life the more love we share with our
community it's it's that mirror effect
it comes back to us
and we're practicing the muscle so when
it does come back to us we can receive
it cuz often times we want to be seen
and we can't see all the ways we are
being seen you know it might be that our
partner is telling us things all the
time but we're like blocking it or
literally not hearing it or not
translating it as being seen so the more
we do it the more we work that muscle
and make ourselves available to actually
being seen as well and I really like the
way that you included the seeing of
yourself in that as well cuz I I could
imagine a there's a lot of people who'd
be listening to this and be like oh yeah
I can see I'm I I like I'm an
understanding person I can see what's
going on in these other people that I'm
having conflict with I am understanding
but if they're not giving themselves
that seeing if they're not seeing
themselves then there's still something
in that hungry ghosts that's missing
that's right that's right yeah seeing
themselves and letting them have that
that inner felt sense of being seen
right letting your own body feel
it I see how everything that comes with
that and everything that comes with that
that's right that fear and the rief yeah
letting it hit the Body Hit the heart
and the gut rickochet around like a
pinball machine well this has been
lovely thank you Tara he Brett always a
joy thanks for listening to the art of
accomplishment if you enjoyed what you
heard today please share it with a
friend and remember to follow us and
rate US in your podcast app the art of
accomplishment was produced and hosted
by myself Brett kler and Joe Hudson mon
Kelly is our production coordinator this
episode was edited by on replay